Add a proposal for coinholder-control of a full 20% of block rewards for ecosystem funding. (#995)
zcash/zips: zips/draft-pm-pure-coinholder-funding.md

    ZIP: XXX
    Title: Pure Coinholder Funding Model
    Owners: Tatyana Peacemonger

>             Josh Swihart <josh@electriccoin.co>

Reviewer: Please remove Josh's email address

>             Josh Swihart <josh@electriccoin.co>

Reviewer: please remove Josh's email

>             Josh Swihart <josh@electriccoin.co>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            Josh Swihart
```

    Category: Consensus / Process
    Created: 2025-02-19
    License: MIT
    Pull-Request: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/???>

# Terminology

The key words "MUST", "SHOULD", and "MAY" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 [^BCP14] when, and only when, they appear in
all capitals.

The terms "Mainnet" and "Testnet" in this document are to be interpreted as
defined in the Zcash protocol specification [^protocol-networks].

The terms "Electric Coin Company" (or "ECC"), "Bootstrap Project" (or "BP") and
"Zcash Foundation" (or "ZF") in this document are to be interpreted as
described in ZIP 1014 [^zip-1014].

The terms "Zcash Community Grants" (or "ZCG"), "ZCG Committee" and "Deferred
Dev Fund Lockbox" in this document are to be interpreted as defined in ZIP 1015
[^zip-1015].

Protocol-defined Ecosystem Funding is funding from sources defined by the Zcash
Protocol for development of the Zcash ecosystem. At the time of writing,
Protocol-defined Ecosystem Funding is allocated from a portion of block rewards
via Funding Streams [^zip-0207] and Lockbox Funding Streams [^zip-2001].

“ZEC” refers to the native currency of Zcash on Mainnet.

# Abstract

> This proposal outlines a funding model that gives the coin holders distinct

Reviewer: "that gives the coin holders a distinct voice"

> This proposal outlines a funding model that gives the coin holders distinct
> voices in determining what, if any, grants are provided to support Zcash’s

Author: ```suggestion
This proposal outlines a funding model that gives the coin holders a distinct
voice in determining what, if any, grants are provided to support Zcash’s
```

development and community efforts.

Under this model, 20% of the block rewards will accrue to a fund controlled by
decisions of coin holders, seeded by the Deferred Dev Fund Lockbox. The
Coinholder-Controlled Fund may be used to distribute grants to ecosystem
participants, or left at rest.

> This system would be activated through until the 3rd halving, allowing enough

Reviewer: "activated until"

> This system would be activated through until the 3rd halving, allowing enough

Author: ```suggestion
This system would be activated until the 3rd halving, allowing enough
```

time to determine whether it should be changed or codified for longer.

# Motivation

If no action is taken, in November 2025 funds from block subsidies will stop
being directed to Zcash Community Grants [^zip-1015-zcg] and to the Deferred
Dev Fund Lockbox established by ZIP 2001 [^zip-2001]. If the block subsidies

> stop, it will risk a gap in funding of Zcash development organisations, either

Reviewer: delete "either"

> stop, it will risk a gap in funding of Zcash development organisations, either
> via ZCG grants or via potential future disbursements from the Deferred Dev Fund

Author: ```suggestion
stop, it will risk a gap in funding of Zcash development organisations,
via ZCG grants and via potential future disbursements from the Deferred Dev Fund
```

Lockbox.

This proposal aims to:

> * maximizes the alignment between the coinholders and those who seek funding from block rewards,

Reviewer: typo "maximize"

> * maximizes the alignment between the coinholders and those who seek funding from block rewards,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* maximize the alignment between the coinholders and those who seek funding from block rewards,
```

* No single party's non-cooperation or loss of keys is able to cause any
  Protocol-defined Ecosystem Funding to be locked up unrecoverably.
* During the period of this proposal, the block rewards are distributed as
  described in the [Abstract] above.
* The funds in the Deferred Dev Fund Lockbox will be usable immediately on
  activation of this ZIP.
* Any use of Deferred Dev Fund Lockbox funds is consistent with the purpose
  specified in [^zip-1015-lockbox] of "funding grants to ecosystem
  participants".

# Non-requirements

* Any changes to Zcash protocol governance, specifically what changes are made
  to consensus node software, are outside this proposal’s scope.

# Specification

This proposal empowers the coin holders to independently determine what, if
anything, should be funded through development fund grants.

The funding streams described below will be defined in a new revision of ZIP
214 [^zip-0214].

## Coinholder-Controlled Fund

A pool of multisig-controlled funds, seeded from the existing contents of the
ZIP 1015 Deferred Dev Fund Lockbox [^zip-1015-lockbox] and supplemented with a
new funding stream consising of 20% of the block subsidy forms a new

> Coinholder-Controlled Fund.

Reviewer: Just want to make sure this paragraph makes sense.

The Key-Holder Organizations SHALL be bound by a legal agreement to only use
funds held in the Coinholder-Controlled Fund according to the specifications in
this ZIP, expressed in suitable legal language. In particular, all requirements
on the use of Deferred Dev Fund Lockbox funds in ZIP 1015 [^zip-1015-lockbox]
MUST be followed for Coinholder-Controlled Fund.

The Key-Holder Organizations collectively administer the Coinholder-Controlled
Fund based on decisions taken by coinholder voting, following a model decided
by the community and specified in another ZIP [TBD].

## Zcash Community Grants

In order to continue to receive funding, Zcash Community Grants will have to
submit a grant proposal for coinholder vote.

# Disbursement process

1. Anyone can submit a grant application via a process agreed upon by the
   Key-Holder Organizations.
2. Coinholders will vote on grant applications every three months. Grant
   applications must be submitted for community review 30 days prior to
   coinholder voting.
3. If a grant application is not [vetoed](#veto-process) and proceeds to a
   coinholder vote according to the agreed process, then coinholders will be
   asked to vote on it.

> 4. If the vote passes, then as payments are scheduled for the grant, then

Reviewer: delete the second "then" in this line?

> 4. If the vote passes, then as payments are scheduled for the grant, then

Author: ```suggestion
4. If the vote passes, then as payments are scheduled for the grant,
```

   (subject to the [Veto process]) the Key-Holder Organizations SHOULD sign the
   corresponding transactions for disbursement from the Coinholder-Controlled
   Fund.

For coinholder votes, a minimum of 420,000 ZEC (2% of the total eventual

> supply) MUST be voted, with a simple majority cast in favor, for a grant
> proposal to be approved. Upon approval, the grants are paid to the recipient
> per the terms of the grant proposal. In the case that multiple grant proposals
> are submitted that are in competition with one another, a single winner will be
> selected by holding a separate coinholder vote for each proposal, with the
> approved proposal having the highest total ZEC value committed in support being
> the winner. It is the responsibility of the Key-Holder Organizations to

Author: ```suggestion
supply) MUST be voted, with a simple majority cast in favor, for a grant
proposal to be approved. Upon approval, the grants are paid to the recipient
per the terms of the grant proposal. In the case that multiple grant proposals
are submitted that are in competition with one another, a single winner will be
selected by holding a separate coinholder vote for each proposal, with the
approved proposal having the highest total ZEC value committed in support being
the winner. It is the responsibility of the Key-Holder Organizations to
```

via Funding Streams [^zip-0207] and Lockbox Funding Streams [^zip-2001].

“ZEC” refers to the native currency of Zcash on Mainnet.

# Abstract

This proposal outlines a funding model that gives the coin holders distinct
voices in determining what, if any, grants are provided to support Zcash’s
development and community efforts.

Under this model, 20% of the block rewards will accrue to a fund controlled by
decisions of coin holders, seeded by the Deferred Dev Fund Lockbox. The
Coinholder-Controlled Fund may be used to distribute grants to ecosystem
participants, or left at rest.

This system would be activated through until the 3rd halving, allowing enough
time to determine whether it should be changed or codified for longer.

# Motivation

If no action is taken, in November 2025 funds from block subsidies will stop
being directed to Zcash Community Grants [^zip-1015-zcg] and to the Deferred
Dev Fund Lockbox established by ZIP 2001 [^zip-2001]. If the block subsidies
stop, it will risk a gap in funding of Zcash development organisations, either
via ZCG grants or via potential future disbursements from the Deferred Dev Fund
Lockbox.

This proposal aims to:

> * align economic incentives with decisions related to distributed funds,

Author: ```suggestion
* maximizes the alignment between the coinholders and those who seek funding from block rewards,
```

indefinite duration, the Key-Holder Organizations SHOULD hold additional
coinholder votes to determine whether funding should continue.

Coinholders are not obligated to fund any grants and MAY leave the funds at rest.

No organizations or individuals are restricted from voting their coins.

### Veto process

A grant is vetoed if:

* any Key-Holder Organization declares that funding the grant would violate any
  of its legal or reporting obligations; or
* two or more Key-Holder Organizations declare that they have a principled
  objection to it on the basis of potential harm to Zcash users, or because it
  is antithetical to the values of the Zcash community.

If a grant is vetoed after passing a coinholder vote, then payments for it MUST
be stopped. This is expected to be an unusual situation that would only occur
if new adverse information came to light, or in the case of a change in the law
or unanticipated legal proceedings.

The Key-holder Organizations cannot veto coinholder rejection of a proposal.

Vetos are intended for exceptional cases and SHOULD be accompanied by a
thorough rationale.

# Administrative obligations and constraints

> All provisions of ZIP 1015 imposing obligations and constraints on Bootstrap
> Project, Electric Coin Company, Zcash Foundation, Financial Privacy Foundation,
> the ZCG Committee, and grant recipients relating to the previous ``FS_FPF_ZCG``
> funding stream, SHALL continue in effect for Zcash Community Grants.
> 
> These obligations and constraints will be extended to all Key-Holder
> Organizations in respect of the Coinholder-Controlled Fund.

Author: ```suggestion
All provisions of ZIP 1015 imposing obligations and constraints on Bootstrap
Project, Electric Coin Company, Zcash Foundation, Financial Privacy Foundation,
the ZCG Committee, and grant recipients relating to the previous ``FS_FPF_ZCG``
funding stream, SHALL continue in effect for Zcash Community Grants.
These obligations and constraints will be extended to all Key-Holder
Organizations in respect of the Coinholder-Controlled Fund.
```

The provisions after the first paragraph of the section "Zcash Community Grants
(ZCG)" also apply to the Key-Holder Organizations' administration of the
Coinholder-Controlled Fund, with coinholder voting replacing the role of the
ZCG Committee.

Note: Nothing forces developers of Zcash consensus node software to implement
any particular proposal. The aim of a process specification like this one is

> only to social consensus. It fundamentally cannot affect the autonomy of

Author: ```suggestion
only to indicate social consensus. It fundamentally cannot affect the autonomy of
```
